Hey friends, you know that
the code on the beach
conference is coming up here
in August 8th through the 10th
in sunny, Florida. In fact,
I keynoted last year and
I tell you, this is
a great conference. It's a
nonprofit they're really focused on
the community. It's a, from
a conference perspective, very intense,
targeted towards intermediate and advanced
topics, but it's in a
very family friendly atmosphere. I
took my wife and kids.
I went to the conference,
kids went swimming. Then we
all went to Disney world.
I tell you if you
are interested in expanding your
skills and mobile cloud data
space, I encourage you to
seriously check out code on
theBeach@wwwdotcovidonthebeach.com Hansel minutes. Listeners can
save $50 with the coupon
code Hanselman code on the
beach From Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hanselman. It's all weekly discussion
with web developer and technologist
Scott Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number four 30.
In this episode, Scott talks
to me About applied Azure
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes, and
I'm talking with Vishwas, Layla,
who is the author of
a Pluralsight course called applied
Azure. And in my attempts
to continue to learn more
about Azure, I wanted to
bring some experts on to
teach me how this works
and how to build real
systems in Azure. Thanks for
chatting with me today. Thank
you, Scott. So you put
together a course on Pluralsight
and I was excited about
it because it's really practical.
It's applied Azure. It's not
a Sudbury theoretical, is it
Alright, Scott? So that's my,
that was my goal. You
know, we often talk about
the Azure capabilities in terms
of storage and you know,
how the storage is redundant
and even geo-redundant. And we
talk about the service bus,
which are all great capabilities,
of course, but I thought
it would be useful to
take these raw core capabilities
of the platform and translate
them into applied scenario. So
that was the, really the
focus of this course. And
you work on Azure and
you build real world systems
on Azure. This really isn't
theoretical. You're making systems for
clients every day, right? That
is correct Scott. So I've
been working with Azure for
last four or five years,
and we've done a number
of applications and just counting
the applications which are in
production. We've done a number
of these applications. And in
fact, many of the scenarios
that I talk about in
this course have come about
based on a client engagement
customer project. And then I've
tried to genericize those projects,
findings from those projects or
learnings from those project and
try to capture them in
these modules here. As part
of the course, A lot
of times people, when they
start out with Azure, they
have trouble deciding whether they
want to do something in
an Azure virtual machine on
the one side and Azure
website, which is very convenient
on the other side or
somewhere in the middle with
Azure worker rules. How can
someone make the right decision
about what a particular workload
or application needs? That's a
good question, Scott. So in
this course, what I tried
to do was try to
highlight the things that you
can do. And let me
just start with Azure websites
and I have a fancy
name for it, and nobody's
going to use this name
other than me, but I
called them, ready-made execution units.
Now, why do I call
them? Because you really don't
have to worry about, you
know, what hardware does running
on or, you know, what
is the language you're using
or what web server you
basically take your code that
responds to some incoming HTTP
request and you host it
and everything else in terms
of fault tolerance and scalability,
all of that is handled
for you. That's essentially what
Azure websites does. And Scott,
when it first came out,
I used to be writing
all my applications in the
web roles, and then I
should website first came out.
I thought, yeah, it's great,
but maybe I'll host my
blog on it. But for
all the real things, I'll
continue to use the web
role. And then boy, I
was wrong about that because
you know, over the last
18 months or so I've
used websites for all kinds
of things. Like not just
to host websites, but if
I have a VB API
to host out, hosted there,
if I want to write
a SharePoint app and there
are apps now in SharePoint,
you could, Azure websites provides
a convenient way to hosted
there. But back to your
question, I think more and
more of these scenarios where
you're trying to host sort
of application or a web
API are met by websites.
Now you would want to
go to a web role
if you wanted admin access
and you wanted to registry
access, something like that is
not possible in an Azure
website today. Although increasingly if
you asked me this question
about a month back, I
would say, you know, one
other thing that's not possible
is the traffic manager. What
if I wanted to load
balance manager websites across multiple
data centers that was not
possible, but of course the
team has added that they've
added the staging and production
deploy capabilities. So, so I
should have website team certainly
has been adding more capabilities,
but at this point in
time, verbals are good for
if you want, like I
said, the admin access, registry
access and things like that.
And the other important use
case, it still is applicable
for our web roll is
that if you're, let's say
trying to build a HIPAA
compliant application and, or a
fed ramp application, these are
all compliance standards that Microsoft
Azure has achieved in the
last several months. And if
you look at the HIPAA
compliance, Azure websites is not
part of that. So if
you're building such an application,
you would want to use
either of Aperol or you
would want to use a
virtual machine and then host
your code within the IIS
With an Azure virtual machine
or what they call
right. Infrastructure as a service,
you're fully responsible for that
virtual machine. You have to
run windows update, you have
to manage it. It's a,
I like to say it's
like a puppy, it's your
job to keep this thing
alive and maintain it. And
on that Azure website it's
platform as a service, which
means you effectively have nothing
to think about as far
as the underlying system, like
there is a virtual machine,
but you don't care. You
really don't even know what
operating system it's running or
what version of anything it's
running. It just runs your
own. That is correct. And
in fact, that is true
for both a web role
and an Azure website that
you really don't worry about.
The underlying batching or security
fixes and things like that.
You focus on writing your
code and you deploy that
code in the  case,
that deployment takes some additional
amount of time because they
are going out and provisioning
a machine based on your
specifications. They're assigning you an
internal IP address. They're, they're
connecting you to load balancer
and things like that. So
it takes about a medium
time, four, five, six minutes
to deploy to web roll.
And in case of Azure
website, that deployment takes seconds
because they have a pre-provision
capacity that is out there
and they simply take your
code and deploy it. Now,
there are some other differences
there though. Even in Nigeria
website, you can start out
in a fleet year where
you are sort of cool
located with others, but you
can scale yourself up and
get yourself an entire virtual
machine if you want it
to. So the lines between
Azure website and liberals have
blurred over the period because
Azure websites have continuously added
capabilities, but if you truly
wanted to control the behavior
of the application, access to
registry, run it in admin
mode, web roll is still
the way to go, but
for everything else, Azure websites
would be my first preference.
Okay. So then a web
role has It is a
managed operating system. It might
reboot at any time, it
might get windows update at
any time, but I can
remote into it. I can
do whatever I want to
That is that is a
true in a web role,
you can remote into it.
And one of the interesting
difference, Scott is that in
order to take advantage of
the SLA, that Microsoft offers,
you have to have two
instances of the role connected
to a load balancer. And
only then can you be
assured of the SLA guarantees?
And that's for a very
simple reason, typically they will
place the instances and two
different fault domains or upgrade
domains. So the idea is
that if they are trying
to patch, not your OSHC,
but the underlying, or they
would bring one machine down,
patch it and then bring
you back up. So your
applications is never down in
case of Azure. Website's very
interesting. You really are not
running two instances. You're only
running one instance and you
still get that SLA guarantee
because you know, more, they
have more control, they can
detect what's happening and they
can move you to another
instance. So there's that subtlety
there. And one of the
interesting differences web role is
if you have two instances
of every role, you are
connected through a load balance,
which is essentially a round
Robin load balance. There is
no state at all, between
the two instances of epidural
in case of Azure websites,
because of the err module
in there, you do get
a stickiness. That's, that's one
other important difference between the
two website, but interestingly Scott,
so we, we have been
talking about how Azure websites
is certainly, you know, by
virtue of adding new capabilities
certainly is, is, is being
sold as a platform for
enterprise applications. So, you know,
you can have large websites
that want to handle large
amounts of traffic. They can
certainly use it. One of
the interesting use case, and
I think Scott, you talked
about it in a blog
post a while back. And
that happened to be one
of the scenarios that I've
worked on. So one of
the startups came to us
and they are in the
business of, you know, if
you're organizing a charity event,
they would set up a
website for you. And they
have arrangements with a number
of different payment gateways. So
you're organizing a charity event,
they will set up a
site for you. They can
collect money on your behalf.
And then, you know, of
course give you the money
when the event is done.
And then these sites are
typically up for a day,
a week or a few
hours even, and they want
this rapid, the ability to
create these sites and then
shut them down. And they
were, what they were doing
today was, you know, going
to, to a holster and
they had written a bunch
of code, which would anybody
presses a new site, they
would come in and then
go and provision a new
IIS, virtual directory, deploy the
code and have it up
and running. And we talked
to them and said, you
know, you can do this
in an Azure website. And
they said, well, this is
going to be expensive. Because
every time they looked at
the Azure pricing numbers and
they said, this is going
to be expensive. You know,
in, in the holsters case,
I just have one machine
or two large machines until
the time then we started
showing them the standard version,
which you talked about Scott,
which is, you know, essentially
go up one website and
then multitenant hundreds of websites
within that. And that proved
to be a cost effective
way for them to run
it. So that's, that was
one point I was trying
to make. But if you
allow me just a quick,
on the other end of
the spectrum, Scott, we have
talked about Azure website and
web roles. And then, you
know, you could say that
infrastructure, so this virtual machine,
well, you have to install
IAS and you have to
do all those things there,
but even the line between
a raw virtual machine and
a web role is also
blurring there. Because if you
see what was announced at
build or what was announced
just last month, that decade
called notion of agent based
deployment. So when you're provisioning
a virtual machine, they will
install an agent. And by
virtue of that agent, you
can add more extensions to
it. So you can say,
Oh, by the vape, do
me a roll virtual machine,
but add an extension that
provides me malware protection. And
now suddenly it's not, you
still have the puppy, but
somebody else is taking care
of one chore to manage
that puppy and think of
more extensions. And now the
lines between even the web
role and the virtual machine
role begin to blur. Yeah.
With my, with my new
little startup application called my
echo, it's a dictation application
for iPhones. I have to
run a backend service to
act as a relay so
that my iPhone application can
talk to my windows application.
And it was the addition
of traffic manager, as well
as the ability to have,
you know, a hundred percent
uptime or at least close
to a hundred percent uptime
without having to break the
bank that caused me to
pick Azure websites. So I
have a three standard instances,
one in South Asia, one
in West Europe and one
in the U S and
it gives me near worldwide
coverage, a very good experience
for everyone all over the
world. I can deploy to
all three of them. I'm
automatically getting performance load balancing.
And the whole thing runs
on websites. Something I would
have picked a web roles
for maybe a year ago,
even That's right. That's absolutely
right. Yep. Hi, this is
Scott. I really appreciate our
sponsors because they make the
show possible. Today's show is
sponsored by developer express, become
a UI superhero with dev
express controls and libraries deliver
elegant.net solutions that address customer
needs today by leveraging your
existing knowledge, you can build
next generation touch enabled solutions
for tomorrow. You can download
your free 30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com.
That's dx.hanselminutes.com. Yeah, I think
websites are becoming, they used
to be thought of, I
think perhaps as a toy
people thought, Oh, you just
use websites for a quick
little deployment, but I don't
know if you know this
or not, but did you
know that a web weblogs.asp.net,
as of, I believe today,
is now running entirely on
Azure websites and that is
using orchard, which is, you
know, historically been thought of
as being a non trivially
sized application, but rather a
large application it's been quite
tuned to work on Azure.
So they're actually running 750
blogs in just four Azure
websites, but they're only on
one virtual machine. So this
is for Azure website instances
running on a single standard
large VM. Yep. That I
did not know that, but
I'm not surprised this is,
this is great. And I'm
glad you're not surprised. I'm
not surprised because you know,
I've been a fan of
Azure websites in the number
of scenarios. And I mentioned
the SharePoint app, you know,
if you needed some place
to host this piece of
customization code, that acts as
a glue between your SharePoint
instance and you have this
piece of customization, Azure website
seems to be a great
place to host it. Yeah,
absolutely. And the perf numbers
are pretty ridiculous. They do
17 terabytes span without and
a million and a half
page views. And it's interesting
also because it's using all
of the different aspects of
Azure. It's got the Azure
CDN, it's got the blob
storage, there's queue storage for
synchronization and also Azure cache.
So that kind of brings
us into discussion of loosely
coupled apps. You talk about
this in your, in your
course that, you know, an
application isn't just a website
sitting on a single instance.
They need to use different
services and have loose coupling
between them like you're using
service bus. That's all right.
So that, that was an
interesting project that I worked
on was about the loosely
coupled application. So essentially, you
know, I think we can
all agree that building applications
that are loosely coupled is
a good thing. And in
this scenario, the example that
I talk about in that
particular module, Scott is the
insurance example. So often times
when you buy an insurance
from a company that company's
not themselves underwriting your insurance,
what they need do is
take your coat and send
it out to a bunch
of underwriters. And these underwriters
will then come back with
a quote and then they
let you select which copy
you want. That's very simply
stated problem. So in this
case, what you want to
do is typically want to
add new underwriters to the
mix without sort of causing
a big upheaval in your
system. And, you know, the
tools that I use here,
I'm using service bus topics,
which is a fantastic tools
for me to take this
message and then publish it.
And anybody who's subscribing to
that topic will get that
message. So that allows me
to bring additional underwriters as
I need them. That's one
aspect of it. And then
in the same module, I
talk about how these underwriters
may have a slightly different
way of capturing this information.
So their schema is, may
be different. So I also
combine in that example, the
loose coupling offered by a
service bus topic with something
like a document store. Like
in this case, I use
a Mongo DB store, which
allows me to persist these
messages that are coming back
from underwriters, which may look
slightly different. So I don't
have to necessarily have one
unified data model, like gives
me more flexibility to add
more providers. So that was
the idea. And the interesting
thing about that is, you
know, Azure service bus of
course is available in Azure,
but you have an equal
amount of that on the
windows side, the windows service
bus. And of course, Mongo
DB, you could install in
Azure or you can install
it locally on premises. So
in this course, what I've
tried to do is I've
tried to talk about Azure
concepts, but I've also tried
to leverage the fact that
many of these examples and
concepts, you can, you have
parity between them, between non-premise
has setup and an Azure
setup. I think that when
people move things into the
cloud, it's the realization that
there's a lots of different
kinds of work being done.
You know, it's not just
traditional web apps where we
have one job and that
is to generate and serve
a page. You've got backend
work, administrative work, you've got
workflows, you've got background processes.
And this means that scaling
up a site is more
than just moving a slider
bar from one instance to
multiple instances, you know, That's
great. So you've got different
processes, different administration tools. You've
got the Azure service bus
doing the coordination between them.
You've got Mongo DB, you
might want to scale any
and all of those things
at a different rate. That's,
that's exactly right. So, you
know, once I've sort of
decouple my incoming messages and
I've placed that message on
the topic, I can then
scale that up in that
manner. I can add more
underwriters because I'm getting too
many requests and they're not
able to handle them. And
then it also allows me
that decoupling that, you know,
one of my underwriters has
down, I can leave that
message and they can come
back and leave it at
a later time. So it
offers all of those kinds
of things that make the
applications, you know, more robust
and less brutal. The things
that you're really passionate about
is the ability to have
large amounts of data, get
acted upon a kind of
big compute where, you know,
maybe you've got a website
that's collecting data or underwriters
are doing work, but someone
needs to go and analyze
later with Excel, Azures maybe
doing the chewing of the
data, is that correct? And
then Excel does the analysis
That's right. So, you know,
I have two models, Scott,
one of them, I call
the big compute with HPC
services for Excel. And I've
worked with professional services, scuff
form, multinational professional services firm,
which does a lot of
these actuarial calculations and believe
it or not, they have
these large Excel models. These
are 10, 20 Meg Excel
files, which have lots and
lots of calculations in them.
And these are your four
zero one K or diamond
calculations, if you will. And
imagine having to do these
calculations for large number of
employees that different permutations and
combinations over and over again.
So rather than having that
code be written in C
sharp or vb.net they're analyst,
right? Most of these models
in Excel. Now, if you're
trying to execute so many
instances of Excel, you'll very
quickly run out of capacity
on, on, on your machine
locally or on premises. So
one of the capabilities that
HPC offers is that you
can set up HPC is
high performance computing. And what
you can set up is
you can set up multiple
compute nodes. And what HPC
services for Excel does is
you can have an Excel
instance on each of these
compute nodes, and then you
have a soar style or
service oriented architecture style access
into these compute notes. So
what is happening in this
instance, in this module that
I talked about, Scott is
now once you have populated
these compute nodes with the
right Excel models, you can
come in and make a
call into HPC and HPC
will allow your request to
one of the right compute
nodes. So this way you
can scale up, you can
have any number of these
compute nodes. And then interestingly,
you can also have a
scenario where you could be
running the setup completely on
premises, because you know, your
capacity is enough to meet
your needs for your normal
course of operation, but come
twice a year or twice
a year where you are
trying to do all the
calculations all over again for
all your clients, you can
just burst out to the
cloud for that period of
time. So in fact, that
interaction is very interesting. Your
computer could still be in
on premises environment. You can
just simply burst out to
the cloud, get additional set
of compute notes, do your
calculation, and then complete the
required processing that you need
to get done. So that's,
that's one big compute scenario.
Of course, the, your team
has done a great job
of also giving you a
tool to do data analysis.
So what I about previously
was really, you were doing
a lot of number crunching
and that is accomplished through
HPC services for Excel report
for you're trying to do
a lot of data processing
and the HD insight team
within Azure has given you
an Apache Hadoop version of
that in Azure. So you
can go in and say,
please give me a Hadoop
cluster of 16 nodes, and
you can do the data
processing. And one thing that's
very interesting. And let me
just go back and sort
of explain this in terms
of a proof of concept,
and this is not in
production, Scott, this is a,
this is a proof of
concept that I built for
FBI. I think I'm allowed
to say that because this
is a proof of concept.
They, they have this application
where they wanted to stand
up these sites very quickly
around the country, collect the
data and then process this
data. And Azure websites is
a great way to say,
go ahead and pro you
know, build these applications and
then provision them across various
data centers across the U
S and as this data
is coming in in the
form of either text, audio,
or video clips, this data
directly goes into Azure blob
storage. And one interesting thing
about the HD site implementation
is it is of course
the Hadoop implementation, but rather
than the data that you're
trying to process coming in
from an HDFS system, your
data could be in actually
the Azure blob storage. So
for this example, what we
have done is we have
uploaded the data into the
Azure blob storage and then
provision and HD insight cluster,
and then run some interesting
queries on top of that
data. And then finally, once
you have funds, you have
process this data, you can
go into Excel and then
using something called hive, which
is SQL like language, which
really can work ultimately to
some MapReduce logic. You can
have an ODBC driver, good
old ODBC driver inside Excel
that connects to this HD
insight cluster. And then you
can do for the slicing
and dicing of that information.
So that's, that's a pretty
interesting scenario there as well.
And how transparent is this
to the user? The user
just feels like they have
unlimited computing power, or are
they having to tell Azure
what to do to make
this scale? So to the,
to the user, who's setting
up the cluster, they need
to go in and provision.
The light is the insight
clusters. And then you need
to load the data into
the, into the blob storage,
which is acting as the
HDFS file system. But to
the end user, who's doing
this analytics on the data
that is already there in
the HD insight cluster for
them, it is, could be
as simple as opening up
Excel, opening up an external
data connection to this HD
insight cluster, and then, you
know, fighting off some commands
and getting that data back.
So from an end user
analyst perspective, it is, it
is very approachable. They are
not worried about, you know,
where this data is coming
from, but the person who's
setting it up, they need
to provision these insights clustered
appropriately. And this, this is
kind of funny, forgive my
ignorance, but it almost seems,
I guess I, I think
as I am not an
Excel user on a regular
basis of Excel as being
kind of a, a thing
of the past, it's, you
know, it, it is what
it is, it's basic spreadsheets,
but this really moves Excel
into a totally different way
of thinking. It's almost like
Excel as terminal server. It's,
it's a, it's a view
on top of a much,
much more powerful backend that
is doing a tremendous amount
of work. That is exactly
like Scott. In fact, there's
a, there's an interesting history
behind this that, you know,
Microsoft tried to, you know,
obviously have a significant BI
offering in, in form of
all lab services and all
the offerings that come with
SQL server. And they were
trying to get a desktop
tool, which will allow, which
was really the tool that
allows you to consume that
BI functionality. And there were
a number of acquisitions made
over the last decade or
so, but, you know, the
answer kept coming back as
well. I use Excel for
everything else. Why don't you
add this BI capability directly
into Excel, because that's what
I'm most familiar with. So
even if you're not an
Excel power user, you know,
about pivot tables, because that's
a core capability that existed
for years and years and
years, but now imagine that
pivot being connected to an
external source. So that's, that's
really the beauty it's, it's,
it's transitioned into this, this
modern BI tool that you
use, and whether you are
getting data from in Hadoop
cluster, or you're getting data
from Azure data marketplace, or
you're getting data from some
old data endpoint, you can
match that data up, create
an in memory cube. And,
you know, that's some of
the recent addition squats like
the power query and the
power maps and things like
that. You can clearly build
nice looking, not only charts,
but animations that bring it
all together in terms of
being able to visualize the
state. So if companies already
have Azure and they're already
doing work on Azure and
they've already owned Excel, and
like there's nothing additional to
be purchased. Is there, it's
just a matter of doing
the analysis and deciding what
this should look like for
your company. That is right.
So if, if they have
Azure and they are using
HD insights service in Azure,
so they have this data
they're processing this data and
they can simply, if they
want Excel, they can download
the free HD and sorry,
hive ODBC driver from the
Microsoft site, and then start
slicing and dicing that data.
That's absolutely right. And you
have a whole module on
this within your applied insights
course that anyone with a
Pluralsight subscription can start looking
at right now. That is
correct. So I, I talk
about, there are three modules
in there. One is about
the HD insight, which is
the big data module. And
we already talked about the
big compute Excel module. And
then there is also a
module that I talk about
if you are not trying
to do big data or
big compute kinds of things,
you can also connect up
multiple worker roles and then
offload processing to a worker
role. So you can, you
can certainly do that if
you're trying to do something
which is more custom and
not the scale that you
want to have an HD
insight cluster, you can also
provision a set of worker
roles and connect them using
Azure queues or service bus
queue. And you can, again,
implement if you will, your
own custom MapReduced algorithm, if
you wanted to do that.
So I have three modules
that, that sort of address
the same problem, slightly different
toolset for a slightly different
problem. Very cool. Cool. Well,
thanks so much Vishwas for
chatting with me today about
applied Azure, and we'll make
sure to include a link
to this course in the
show notes and people can
connect with you online. Well,
thank you, Scott. It's been
pleasure talking to you. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.